# Real OS Version

A simple command-line tool (and library) for determining the **real** Windows version, in the post Windows 8.1 era.

## Background

Starting with *Windows 8.1*, Microsoft has **broken** then `GetVersion()` and `GetVersionEx()` API's. Starting with *Windows 10*, Microsoft has **broken** then `VerifyVersionInfo()` function too. So, be aware that these Win32 API functions do **not** return the actual Windows version, if your code is running on Windows 8.1 or later! Instead, these functions now look at the program's *compatibility manifest* and return **at most** the Windows version that the program has been compiled for. If the program file is missing the required manifest entry, `GetVersionEx()` and friends will pretend that we are running on Windows 8.0, even when we are actually running on Windows 8.1 or Windows 10! On other words: These function do **not** return the actual Windows version, but the Windows version that Microsoft believes your application *probably wants to hear*. Of course this is *nonsensical* and absolutely **not** what the programmer expects!

Also note that the "recommended" solution (by Microsoft), which is adding GUID's for every supported Windows version to the programs *compatibility manifest* is **fundamentally flawed**. First of all, you can only add GUID's for those Windows versions that existed by the time your program or library was compiled. This means that you will **never** be able to get the *correct* result on future Windows versions. Secondly, and even more important: *Library* developers have exactly **zero** influence which GUID's are present in the *compatibility manifest* of the calling application! This means that any library code that needs to *relibaly* detect the Windows versions (even Windows versions that existed by the time the library was compiled) has **no** chance to get the *correct* result. Bummer!

## The Solution

Workarounds to "reveal" the actual Windows version exist. For example, one may try *guestimating* the real Windows version from certain Registry entries, or from the file versions of certain system libraries. But, while these methods may seem to work in most cases, they still are *dubious* and **not** reliable. It is also possible to obtain the real Windows version via WMI (Windows Management Instrumentation), but this is *complex* and requires a lot of COM hackery. Certainly **not** what you want for a task as simple (at least in theory) as determing the Windows version.

At the same time, *Real OS Version* manages to reveal the actual Windows version strictly by using "official" Win32 API calls. Also, this function works regardless of the application Manifest, i.e. it will (to the best of our knowledge) continue to work correctly in *future* Windows versions! Finally, this function still returns the correct Windows version, when the program or library runs in "compatibility mode".

*Real OS Version* uses an iterative approach: It first calls `GetVersionEx()` to get the "fake" Windows version. Then it tries to refine the Windows version, step by step, using the `VerifyVersionInfo()` function - until the "real" version has been revealed. Furthermore, because the `VerifyVersionInfo()` function has been broken too on Windows 10 (d'oh!), we now try to call the "native" functions `RtlGetVersion()` and `RtlVerifyVersion()` directly from NTDLL.DLL, instead of using the "crippled" counterparts from KERNEL32.DLL. This has been tested to give *correct* results on all Windows versions from Windows XP up to and including Windows 10.
